the truce between Israel and Hamas was
celebrated as a major diplomatic
achievement and this weekend showed why
dozens of families were reunited after
weeks of Anguish Gins got a break from
the constant fighting eight was allowed
to flow into the enclave and the
displaced had a chance to calmly assess
the damage now on the final day of the
initial deal the agreement has been
extended by two days 20 more more
hostages will be released in exchange
for 60 Palestinian Prisoners the
announcement follows an international
chorus asking for the ceasefire to
continue but Israel insists it won't be
permanent among those already released
is 9-year-old Emily hand a dual Irish
Israeli National Emily marked her ninth
birthday while held captive meanwhile
her family received a succession of
devastating updates first hearing that
she'd been killed and the Hamas attacks
of October 7th and then being told she
was actually among the hostages held in
Gaza a loving Embrace marks the end of
an unimaginable ordeal and a peak of an
emotional roller coaster too complex to
describe Tom Hand thought he'd never see
his daughter Emily again he was told she
was dead for him it was the better
option of two horrifying scenarios it
was
unofficial um yeah I was told that
the she was
found in the kibuts and she was found
dead I was uh I was relieved I was
relieved that uh she was dead and it was
all it was all over it would have been
pretty quick yeah it was it was a relief
thinking that she wasn't in Gaza I I
preferred
that but Emily was in Gaza with no
parent to turn to for comford no one to
wish her a happy birthday when she
turned nine when Tom learned a mistake
had been made his world collapsed a
second
time in in that moment I was just thrown
back into the nightmare that just the
sheer Terror of a
9-year-old girl
down in those dark tunnels never seeing
the light of
day but sheer Terror Panic every hour of
every
day she must be saying every day where's
my daddy where is my daddy why isn't he
come to save
me
Nightmare the nightmare lasted 50 days
this is a picture of my daughter Emily
but slowly very slowly suffering made
way for hope when the news broke that
Hamas would indeed release Israeli
hostages in exchange for Palestinian
Prisoners the people of an entire
country held their breath from Tel Aviv
to the Dead Sea where evacuated
residents from kots ber had gathered to
watch anxiously as Emily and others
crossed the
border this is so exciting yes it was
this was joyful for the community of the
Kuts they clapped and chanted it was
exciting for us all we're United as one
Community among the relieved crowd a
Community member deeply involved in
Emily's
story I'm the one who told her father
that she has murdered been murdered been
found
murdered and uh a week later I I'm the
one who told his the father that she
probably uh capture she's here she with
us and uh I have to tell his father to
give him a hug and say I'm sorry
again so for me it's a
closure for Emily and her father closure
isn't likely to come so
quickly while the family is United again
it'll take much more than hugs to fix
everything that broke during those 50
days in
Gaza we can now speak to Professor hagay
LaVine he's the head of the medical team
of the hostages Family Forum in Israel
he and his team help hostages returning
home deal with the trauma they have
experienced welcome back to the show Mr
LaVine let me start with a personal
question how have these past four days
been for
you it's uh between hope and despair
because we had I had very exciting
exciting moments when you know our come
through and some of the hostages return
to their families return to Israel home
and were you know well welcomed in
Israeli hospitals and some of them
already at home but at the same time I
was last night and today with Elma
Abraham and their children
and extremely tough moments when she was
brought here in critical condition after
severe neglect for a long time clearly
she didn't receive her needed
medications she was beaten all over
probably from being treated like a sack
of potato transferred from a place to
another with body
temperature of
28 Celsius degrees and she now has
facing you know she's ventilated and
facing lifethreatening condition and you
know for family they had hopes and they
were shattered at once so she didn't
come back home and actually her home was
also violated the October 7th Massacre
and at the same time while we are
speaking some hostages are released but
my heart and soul is not only with them
but also with the others that are still
in Gaza more than
150 hostages that some of them need
urgent medical care and the Red Cross is
still not allowed to enter there so I
have mixed feelings and strong feelings
tonight the freed hostages you have met
you mentioned one there but I'd like to
get a bigger picture what did they tell
you about their time in
captivity it depends there are different
stories they were probably in different
locations and uh different
treatment
um what strike really remarkably is the
resilience and solidarity between the
hostages you know that we he today that
one
hostage requested that instead of being
released she asked Please Release the
other woman she's in worse condition
than I am so please release her first
without knowing if she will be ever
released so and you know they shared the
food they didn't get enough food but
they shared the food and gave it to
those who needs most together with that
it's very tough times you know for it
depends for each one but some of them
said that they didn't take a shower for
51 days imagine what it be for you or
for any of us to be in such conditions
and now they have long long long
recovery process with their families
with the great health
professionals but again at the same time
the others do not get the treatment they
need to recover and also you know I met
the mother of Maya reg it was released
and underwent an operation in soroko
medical center at the same time her
brother is still in captivity and I met
the family of yafa Adar at the same time
her grandson is still in captivity so
how could they be happy how can former
hostages sorry to jump in there but how
can former hostages be prepared for a
return to normal life which in some
cases has been completely abended their
entire families have been killed family
members continue in captivity how how
can one medically psychologically go
about that what kind of attention do
they need right
now so we are following three principles
to be personal so it depends on the
individual what he or she needs to be
professional we have some knowledge
although some of the events here are
first time in history but you know it's
like some of the lessons we learn from
Holocaust Survivors for example
regarding diet not to feed them at once
they have dietary deficiencies they told
that they didn't eat fruits and
vegetables and the diet was poor but you
cannot you know correct it at once and
that's the third principle is to be
patient to be patient we need to you
know to give them some time to
understand what happens in the meanwhile
now they realize that they became famous
worldwide now they realize that
sometimes good news sometimes they
thought that mother that thought that
her her son was killed now realize that
he was not killed and on the other end
some have to receive bad news about very
close family members that I either
murdered on the October 7th Massacre or
are still in captivity and to hear that
you know today n o received 11 hostages
still
49 are are still in Gaza but they lost
they under genocide and they lost so
many of their friends that's very
difficult to hear and our heart goes
with them with the families and with
those who are still in them haay LaVine
the head of the medical team of the
hostages Family Forum thank you so
much thank
you the announcement that the pause in
fighting between Israel and Hamas has
been extended for two additional days
gives hope that more hostages may be
walking free from captivity in Gaza the
Israeli government has been releasing
footage of the moment hostages who were
released on Sunday reunited with their
families on Monday a group of 11
hostages left Gaza bringing to 50 the
number of Israelis who have returned
home additional groups of 19 foreign
Nationals held by Hamas most of them
from Thailand have also been released
it's believed about 180 hostages remain
in captivity in the Gaza
Strip Danielle Gilbert is an assistant
professor of political science at
Northwestern University in Illinois and
she explores the causes and consequences
of Hostage taking Danny welcome to the
day we have seen dozens of hostages
freed over the weekend in change for
about triple the amount of Palestinian
prisoners was that hamas's goal when
they abducted all those people on
October
7th that's a great question there are
several different reasons why Hamas
would have taken hostages and certainly
lots of different complicated reasons
why they would have taken so many but a
prisoner exchange has likely always been
part of their intention Hamas has
previously kidnapped Israelis and used
them for prisoners swaps and they've
been talking about doing so since the
early days after October 7th so this was
likely always at least one intention of
their hostage taking what have we been
able to learn about hamas's hostage
taking strategy from those that have
been released in the past couple of
days there's a few different things that
we've learned from the hostages who have
already come out of captivity one is
that we know that it was intentional it
was planned it was part of the uh
Organization for the October 7th attack
in the written documents that the
Israeli military has found in their
Siege of Gaza that they had practiced
and prepared for this that means that
they had specific combatants who were
trained and prepared to take hostages
they had resources prepared to hold
hostages to feed them for weeks on end
they had medical professionals within
their combatant core who have been
providing medical attention to the
hostages as well and so a lot of those
details have emerged from the hostages
as they come out of captivity telling us
about what it was like to be with Hamas
over the last 50 days how does that
compare to other militant organizations
that take
hostages so one thing that is quite
consistent across militant groups around
the world in their kidnapping is that
hostage taking is almost never a crime
of opportunity it is exquisitly
premeditated and planned armed groups
are quite intentional about their
kidnapping and that they focus on that
role specialization that it's someone's
job to abduct the hostages in the first
place someone's job to guard them watch
them care for them over time and someone
else's job to negotiate for their
release so that part is quite consistent
what was different about the October 7th
kidnappings and and just one of the
factors that made these kidnappings
quite unprecedented is the fact that
Hamas took so many vulnerable hostages
it is exceedingly rare for an armed
group to kidnap children or to kidnap
the elderly because if the intention is
to hold hostages to negotiate them for
some sort of concession you have to keep
your hostages alive and that's much
harder to do with children with the
elderly with so many of their hostages
who have been sick and injured without
medication since the 7th of October so
why would they then take so many
vulnerable people because they were easy
to
kidnap it's a great question and the the
full understanding of their intentions
remains to be seen it's entirely
possible that some of the combatants and
militants from the 7th of October got
carried away and grabbed hostages that
they didn't intend to take in the first
place we also know that there are
hostage takers outside of Hamas who
kidnapped on the 7th of October and have
been holding hostages since then so
that's another militant group called
Palestinian Islamic Jihad and Reporting
has suggested that there's individuals
within Gaza who are simply holding
Israelis captive that they took on
October 7th and so we know much less
about those other kidnappers and what
they intended on the 7th of
October now hostage taking is not a new
phenomenon in fact you claim it's as old
as the written word why are we seemingly
witnessing a new rise of Hostage
diplomacy for lack of a better a
word there's a lot of different reasons
why we might be seeing so much hostage
taking and a whole different range of
actors that have been taking hostages so
kidnappings by Hamas by armed groups
those kinds of actions have been
incredibly common over the last 50 years
or so actually Palestinian militant
organizations really pioneered hostage
taking from airplane hijackings back in
the 1970s and since the 1980s we've seen
a lot more kidnappings over the last
decade we've also seen autocratic
governments taking hostages through
their criminal justice system and at the
end of the day hostage takers take
hostages because it works it is
extraordinarily effective at coercing
enormous concessions from much more
powerful governments that are uh taking
great pains but really struggling to
stop this kind of violence why do
democratic nations struggle so much to
find an answer to this kind of
asymmetric
Warfare there is an inherent tension in
hostage taking especially when it comes
to democratic countries that care about
their own citizens who are committed to
bringing their citizens home and that
whatever a government can do today to
bring back its hostages might
incentivize the hostage taking of the
future so making concessions whether
that's paying a ransom or engaging in a
prisoner swap or making other policy
concessions that teaches hostage takers
around the world that hostage taking is
quite successful so that's one of the
reasons that it is so attractive at
least in the short term to perpetrators
right now but the Dem atic world has
kind of moved away from that premise of
we don't negotiate with terrorists
though haven't
they they have and countries have at
various times claimed to have a no
concessions policy they've claimed that
they don't make concessions to hostage
takers which in some countries cases is
variably true and for most countries
isn't true at all some countries have
prohibitions specifically on paying
Ransom to terrorist groups because that
constitutes material support for
terrorism it's the same as making a
donation to a terrorist organization but
in fact most countries have the
incentive to make an exception to that
policy when their own citizens lives are
on the line and so countries are really
struggling with how do they get back to
their own citizens today without
incentivizing more hostage taking
tomorrow yeah so how could Israel's
response to this hostage crisis help
avoid future Mass kidnappings what would
need to happen for their response to
really be a deterrent for the
future it's a great question and it's
one that I imagine the Israeli
government and certainly lots of other
governments all around the world are
thinking about not only because of the
October 7th attacks but because of the
rise in hostage taking around the world
and part of that is the challenge of
coordinating across governments of
leaders getting together agreeing on
what it means to have someone taken
hostage agreeing on those Concepts and
definitions International conventions
and treaties to prohibit and to punish
hostage taking and largely in uh they're
working on thinking about ways that they
can punish and threaten the perpetrators
of Hostage taking so well there have
been past waves of Hostage taking
whether that's airplane hijacking or
kidnapping or Embassy hostage taking
attacks it has taken the military force
security Personnel of those governments
for really threatening hostage takers
making it unlikely that they can succeed
if they continue to take hostages now
you have of course followed this
situation that unfolded after the Hamas
attack in Israel very closely how do you
think the hostage situation shaped the
aftermath of October
7th
in the first days after October 7th one
of the first things that we heard from
Hamas about the hostages was that they
were threatening to kill and publicly uh
demonstrate that execution to post
videos online uh to kill their hostages
every time that the IDF launched an
unannounced missile strike that hit
civilians in Gaza effectively an
explicit threat to use the hostages as
human Shields thankfully we didn't see
that in the early days of uh of this war
after October 7th but it's entirely
possible the fact that there were more
than 200 hostages underground in tunnels
in Gaza might have delayed the Israeli
military incursion and at every level is
probably shaping how the Israeli
military is thinking about its force on
the ground on the flip side the IDF is
talking about the fact that the ground
Invasion that their incursion into Gaza
is what pressured Hamas to come to the
table in the first place so thinking
about the relationship between Hamas
holding all of those hostages and what
the IDF has been willing to do we might
see that change dramatically at the end
of this pause in hostilities if the IDF
continues if it resumes fighting as they
have been threatening to do fascinating
insights thank you so much Danielle
Gilbert